---
title: 'Electricity Bill Optimization'
date: 2021-02-20
permalink: /posts/2021/02/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Optimization
  - Electric Vehicles
---


In this post, I will solve an optimization challenge I was given in a job application.

The challenge is to optimize the electricity bill of a customer with 4 electric vehicles. Each vehicle has a battery of 40 kWh. The customer has four Level-2 charging stations (one for each vehicle) with a maximum charging rate of 7kW. Assume that each charger’s charging rate could be set to any float value between 0 and 7 kW. The on-board AC-DC converter in each vehicle has an efficiency of 70% for charging rates below 5kW and 90% for charging rates above 5kW.

The chargers are located behind the utility grade meter. The customer’s electricity bill is based on the total site load measured at the utility grade meter.

The customer’s electricity tariff is described below:

- For every 15-minute interval t where 9:00 AM < t < 4:00 PM, the cost of the electricity is 0.4$/kWh.
- For every other 15-minute interval, the cost of energy is 0.1$/kWh.
- In addition to the energy costs above, the maximum 15-minute site load max(SiteLoad[kw]) within the day has a corresponding demand cost of 16$/kW. 

Assume that each vehicle departs at midnight (12:00AM) and arrives at 10:00AM with 5kWh energy left in its battery. At the time of departure, the required energy for individual vehicles follows the uniform distribution U(15, 35). By contract, 95% of all of the daily trips must be successfully completed without the need to charge the vehicles before their return to the site.

Given the problem setting above, what would be the power used in each charger for the minimum electricity bill?



My approach:



I started by first defining the variables and then continued with translating the text into math.


Cars are onsite only between 10AM and 12AM.

$i$: Index for each 15 min chunk of a day. There are 96 chunks of 15 min in a day. So, i goes from 0 to 95.

$t_i$: time interval for a given chunk of the day, which is 15 min = 1/4 hr.

$j$: Car index.

$P_{i,j}$: Power used from any charger at a given 15 min chunk (kW).

$Trf_i$: Customer's electricity tariff at a given 15 min chunk ($/kWh).

$BL_i$: Buildingload at a given 15 min chunk (kW). 

$Eff_{j}$: Charging efficiency of the car.

$B$: Battery capacity of a car (kWh).

$E_{j}$: Energy required for a given car (kWh).





The cost function, bill, is:


$$
min \left( Bill = \sum_{i=0}^{95} \sum_{j=0}^{3} (P_{i,j} + BL_i) . Trf_i . t_i + max(\sum_{j=0}^{3} P_{i,j} + BL_i) . 16 \right)
$$

$$
S.T.
$$

$$
0 < P_{i,j} < 7
$$

$$
Trf_i = 
\begin{cases}
  0.4   & if & 9AM < time < 4PM \\
  0.1   & otherwise       \\
\end{cases}
$$

$$
Eff_{i, j} =
\begin{cases}
  0.7 & if & P_i \leq 5 \\
  0.9 & if & P_i >5 \\
\end{cases}
$$

$$
E_{j} = \sum_{i=0}^{55} P_{i, j} . Eff_{i, j} = U(25, 35)_{j} - 5
$$

$$
E_{j} <  B_{j} = 40
$$

Note: The time range in the customer's tariff 9AM < time < 4PM translates to 36 < i < 64 index range.



```python
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from scipy import optimize
from functools import partial
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

class electricbilloptimizer:
    def __init__(self, ncars=4, charger_min=0, charger_max=7, trf_i1=36, trfi2=64,
                 car_energy_low=25, car_energy_high=35, remaining_energy=5, buildingload='./data/buildingload.csv',
                 seed=41, ecar=None):
        
        self.ncars = ncars - (abs(np.random.normal())> 1.96)*1
        print(f"Number of cars returned: %d" % self.ncars)
        self.charger_min = 0
        self.charger_max = 7
        self.trf_i1 = 36
        self.trf_i2 = 64
        self.car_energy_low = 35.
        self.car_energy_high = 45.
        self.energy_remained = 5.
        self.buildingload = self.read_buildingload(buildingload)
        self.seed = 41
        self.eps = 1e-5
        # Add the index to time ratio
        
        
        if ecar is None:
            self.ecars = self.energy_to_be_loaded()
        
    def get_time(self):
        return self.buildingload['Timestamp'].values
    
    
    def get_buildingload(self):
        return self.buildingload['BuildingLoad[kW]'].values
        
    
    def energy_to_be_loaded(self):
        #np.random.seed(self.seed)
        return np.random.uniform(self.car_energy_low, self.car_energy_high, self.ncars) - self.energy_remained
    
    def read_buildingload(self, file):
        df = pd.read_csv(file)
        df['Timestamp'] = pd.to_datetime(df.Timestamp)
        return df
    
   
    def customer_tariff(self):
        trf = np.full(96, 0.1)
        trf[self.trf_i1:self.trf_i2] = 0.4
        return trf

    
    def car_charging_efficiency(self, p):
        return np.where(p < 5, 0.7, 0.9)
    
    
    def bill(self, p):
        bl = self.get_buildingload()
        tariff = self.customer_tariff()
        expr1 = p.reshape(-1, 96).sum(0) + bl
        bill = (expr1 * tariff/4.).sum() + max(expr1) * 16.
        return bill
    
    
    def make_initial_guess(self):
        p0 = np.array([])
        for i in range(self.ncars):
            p = np.random.uniform(self.charger_min+self.eps, self.charger_max-self.eps, 56)
            p = p / p.sum() * self.ecars[i]
            p0 = np.append(p0, np.append(np.zeros(40), p))
        return p0
    
    
    def constraint(self, x, i):
        return np.sum(x[i*96:(i+1)*96] * self.car_charging_efficiency(x[i*96:(i+1)*96])) - self.ecars[i]
    
    
    def generate_constraints(self):
        constraints = ()
        for i in range(self.ncars):
            constraints = constraints + ({'type': 'eq', 'fun': partial(self.constraint, i=i)},)
        return constraints
    
    def generate_bounds(self):
        return ((((0, 1e-12),) * 40 + ((self.charger_min, self.charger_max),) * 56)) * self.ncars
    

    def optimize(self):
        p0 = self.make_initial_guess()
        constraints = self.generate_constraints()
        bounds = self.generate_bounds()
        
        self.res = optimize.minimize(self.bill, x0=p0, bounds=bounds, constraints=constraints)
        print(self.res['message'])
        print(f'Bill: $%f' % self.res['fun'])
        return self.res
    
    def plot_result(self):
        time = self.get_time()
        bl = self.get_buildingload()
        
        plt.figure(figsize=(9, 4))
        for i in range(self.ncars):
            label = 'Car-' + str(i)
            plt.plot(time, self.res.x[i * 96: (i + 1) * 96], label=label)
        plt.plot(time, self.res.x.reshape(-1, 96).sum(0), label='All Cars')
        plt.plot(time, bl[:96], label='Buildingload')
        plt.plot(time, self.res.x.reshape(-1, 96).sum(0) + bl, label='Total')
        plt.xlabel('Time')
        plt.ylabel('Power (kW)')
        plt.legend(loc=0)
        plt.tight_layout()
        plt.show()
```

```python
eoptimize = electricbilloptimizer()
eoptimize.optimize()
eoptimize.plot_result()
```
